=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
*Corresponding author. Tel.: 773 702 7282; fax: 773 702 9937; e-mail: eugene.fama@gsb.uchicago.
edu.
1The comments of Brad Barber, David Hirshleifer, S.P. Kothari, Owen Lamont, Mark Mitchell,
Hersh Shefrin, Robert Shiller, Rex SinqueÞeld, Richard Thaler, Theo Vermaelen, Robert Vishny, Ivo
Welch, and a referee have been helpful. Kenneth French and Jay Ritter get special thanks.
Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283Ð306
Market e¦ciency, long-term returns, and behavioral
Þnance1
Eugene F. Fama*
Graduate School of Business, Uni versity of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
Received 17 March 1997; received in revised form 3 October 1997
Abstract
Market e¦ciency survives the challenge from the literature on long-term return
anomalies. Consistent with the market e¦ciency hypothesis that the anomalies are
chance results, apparent overreaction to information is about as common as underreac-
tion, and post-event continuation of pre-event abnormal returns is about as frequent as
post-event reversal. Most important, consistent with the market e¦ciency prediction that
apparent anomalies can be due to methodology, most long-term return anomalies tend to
disappear with reasonable changes in technique.( 1998 Elsevier Science S.A. All rights
reserved.
JEL classiÞcation: G14; G12
Keywords: Market e¦ciency; Behavioral Þnance
1. Introduction
Event studies, introduced by Fama et al. (1969), produce useful evidence on
how stock prices respond to information. Many studies focus on returns in
a short window (a few days) around a cleanly dated event. An advantage of this
approach is that because daily expected returns are close to zero, the model for
expected returns does not have a big e¤ect on inferences about abnormal returns.
0304-405X/98/$19.00 ( 1998 Elsevier Science S.A. All rights reserved
PII S0304-405X(98)00026-9

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
The assumption in studies that focus on short return windows is that any lag
in the response of prices to an event is short-lived. There is a developing
literature that challenges this assumption, arguing instead that stock prices
adjust slowly to information, so one must examine returns over long horizons to
get a full view of market ine¦ciency.
If one accepts their stated conclusions, many of the recent studies on long-
term returns suggest market ine¦ciency, speciÞcally, long-term underreaction
or overreaction to information. It is time, however, to ask whether this litera-
ture, viewed as a whole, suggests that e¦ciency should be discarded. My answer
is a solid no, for two reasons.
First, an e¦cient market generates categories of events that individually
suggest that prices over-react to information. But in an e¦cient market, appar-
ent underreaction will be about as frequent as overreaction. If anomalies split
randomly between underreaction and overreaction, they are consistent with
market e¦ciency. We shall see that a roughly even split between apparent
overreaction and underreaction is a good description of the menu of existing
anomalies.
Second, and more important, if the long-term return anomalies are so large
they cannot be attributed to chance, then an even split between over- and
underreaction is a pyrrhic victory for market e¦ciency. We shall Þnd, however,
that the long-term return anomalies are sensitive to methodology. They tend to
become marginal or disappear when exposed to di¤erent models for expected
(normal) returns or when di¤erent statistical approaches are used to measure
them. Thus, even viewed one-by-one, most long-term return anomalies can
reasonably be attributed to chance.
A problem in developing an overall perspective on long-term return studies is
that they rarely test a speciÞc alternative to market e¦ciency. Instead, the
alternative hypothesis is vague, market ine¦ciency. This is unacceptable. Like
all models, market e¦ciency (the hypothesis that prices fully reßect available
information) is a faulty description of price formation. Following the standard
scientiÞc rule, however, market e¦ciency can only be replaced by a better
speciÞc model of price formation, itself potentially rejectable by empirical tests.
Any alternative model has a daunting task. It must specify biases in informa-
tion processing that cause the same investors to under-react to some types of
events and over-react to others. The alternative must also explain the range of
observed results better than the simple market e¦ciency story; that is, the
expected value of abnormal returns is zero, but chance generates deviations
from zero (anomalies) in both directions.
Since the anomalies literature has not settled on a speciÞc alternative to
market e¦ciency, to get the ball rolling, I assume reasonable alternatives must
choose between overreaction or underreaction. Using this perspective, Section 2
reviews existing studies, without questioning their inferences. My conclusion is
that, viewed as a whole, the long-term return literature does not identify
284 E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
overreaction or underreaction as the dominant phenomenon. The random split
predicted by market e¦ciency holds up rather well.
Two recent papers, Barberis et al. (1998) and Daniel et al. (1997), present
behavioral models that accommodate overreaction and underreaction. To their
credit, these models present rejectable hypotheses. Section 3 argues that, not
surprisingly, the two behavioral models work well on the anomalies they are
designed to explain. Other anomalies are, however, embarrassing. The problem
is that both models predict post-event return reversals in response to long-term
pre-event abnormal returns. In fact, post-event return continuation is about as
frequent as reversalÐ a result that is more consistent with market e¦ciency than
with the two behavioral models.
Section 4 examines the problems in drawing inferences about long-term
returns. Foremost is an unavoidable bad-model problem. Market e¦ciency
must be tested jointly with a model for expected (normal) returns, and all models
show problems describing average returns. The bad-model problem is ubiqui-
tous, but it is more serious in long-term returns. The reason is that bad-model
errors in expected returns grow faster with the return horizon than the volatility
of returns. Section 4 also argues that theoretical and statistical considerations
alike suggest that formal inferences about long-term returns should be based on
averages or sums of short-term abnormal returns (AARs or CARs) rather than
the currently popular buy-and-hold abnormal returns (BHARs).
In categorizing studies on long-term returns, Sections 2 and 3 do not question
their inferences. Dissection of individual studies takes place in Section 5. The
bottom line is that the evidence against market e¦ciency from the long-term return
studies is fragile. Reasonable changes in the approach used to measure abnormal
returns typically suggest that apparent anomalies are methodological illusions.
2. Overreaction and underreaction: An overview
One of the Þrst papers on long-term return anomalies is DeBondt and Thaler
(1985). They Þnd that when stocks are ranked on three- to Þve-year past returns,
past winners tend to be future losers, and vice versa. They attribute these
long-term return reversals to investor overreaction. In forming expectations,
investors give too much weight to the past performance of Þrms and too little to
the fact that performance tends to mean-revert. DeBondt and Thaler seem to
argue that overreaction to past information is a general prediction of the
behavioral decision theory of Kahneman and Tversky (1982). Thus, one could
take overreaction to be the prediction of a behavioral Þnance alternative to
market e¦ciency. For the most part, however, the anomalies literature has not
accepted the discipline of an alternative hypothesis.
An exception is Lakonishok et al. (1994). They argue that ratios involving
stock prices proxy for past performance. Firms with high ratios of earnings to
E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306 285

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
price (E/P), cashßow to price (C/P), and book-to-market equity (BE/ME) tend
to have poor past earnings growth, and Þrms with lowE/P, C/P, and BE/ME
tend to have strong past earnings growth. Because the market over-reacts to
past growth, it is surprised when earnings growth mean reverts. As a result, high
E/P, C/P, and BE/ME stocks (poor past performers) have high future returns,
and low E/P, C/P, and BE/ME stocks (strong past performers) have low future
returns.
I also classify the poor long-term post-event returns of initial public o¤erings
(IPOs) (Ritter, 1991; Loughran and Ritter, 1995) and seasoned equity o¤erings
(SEOs) (Loughran and Ritter, 1995; Spiess and A§eck-Graves, 1995) in the
overreaction camp. Mitchell and Sta¤ord (1997) show that SEOs have strong
stock returns in the three years prior to the issue. It seems safe to presume that
these strong returns reßect strong earnings. It also seems safe to presume that
IPOs have strong past earnings to display when going public. If the market does
not understand that earnings growth tends to mean revert, stock prices at the
time of the equity issue (IPO or SEO) are too high. If the market only gradually
recognizes its mistakes, the overreaction to past earnings growth is corrected
slowly in the future. Finally, Dharan and Ikenberry (1995) argue that the long-
term negative post-listing abnormal stock returns of Þrms that newly list on the
NYSE or Amex are due to overreaction. Firms list their stocks to take advant-
age of the marketÕs overreaction to their recent strong performance.
If apparent overreaction was the general result in studies of long-term returns,
market e¦ciency would be dead, replaced by the behavioral alternative of
DeBondt and Thaler (1985). In fact, apparent underreaction is about as fre-
quent. The granddaddy of underreaction events is the evidence that stock prices
seem to respond to earnings for about a year after they are announced (Ball and
Brown, 1968; Bernard and Thomas, 1990). More recent is the momentum e¤ect
identiÞed by Jegadeesh and Titman (1993); stocks with high returns over the
past year tend to have high returns over the following three to six months.
Other recent event studies also produce long-term post-event abnormal
returns that suggest underreaction. Cusatis et al. (1993) Þnd positive post-event
abnormal returns for divesting Þrms and the Þrms they divest. They attribute the
result to market underreaction to an enhanced probability that, after a spino¤,
both the parent and the spino¤ are likely to become merger targets, and the
recipients of premiums. Desai and Jain (1997) and Ikenberry et al. (1996) Þnd
that Þrms that split their stock experience long-term positive abnormal returns
both before and after the split. They attribute the post-split returns to market
underreaction to the positive information signaled by a split. Lakonishok and
Vermaelen (1990) Þnd positive long-term post-event abnormal returns when
Þrms tender for their stock. Ikenberry et al. (1995) observe similar results for
open-market share repurchases. The story in both cases is that the market
under-reacts to the positive signal in share repurchases about future perfor-
mance. Finally, Michaely et al. (1995) Þnd that stock prices seem to under-react
286 E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
to the negative information in dividend omissions and the positive information
in initiations.
Some long-term return anomalies are di¦cult to classify. For example,
Asquith (1983) and Agrawal et al. (1992) Þnd negative long-term abnormal
returns to acquiring Þrms following mergers. This might be attributed to market
underreaction to a poor investment decision (Roll, 1986) or overreaction to the
typically strong performance of acquiring Þrms in advance of mergers,
documented in Mitchell and Sta¤ord (1997). Ikenberry and Lakonishok (1993)
Þnd negative post-event abnormal returns for Þrms involved in proxy contests.
One story is that stock prices under-react to the poor performance of these Þrms
before the proxy contest, but another is that prices over-react to the information
in a proxy that something is likely to change.
Given the ambiguities in classifying some anomalies, and given that the
review above is surely incomplete, I shall not do a count of underreaction versus
overreaction studies. The important point is that the literature does not lean
cleanly toward either as the behavioral alternative to market e¦ciency. This is
not lost on behavioral Þnance researchers who acknowledge the issue:
We hope future research will help us understand why the market appears to
overreact in some circumstances and underreact in others. (Michaely et al.,
1995, p. 606).
The market e¦ciency hypothesis o¤ers a simple answer to this question
Ð chance. SpeciÞcally, the expected value of abnormal returns is zero, but chance
generates apparent anomalies that split randomly between overreaction and
underreaction.
Is the weight of the evidence on long-term return anomalies so overwhelming
that market e¦ciency is not a viable working model even in the absence of an
alternative that explains both under- and overreaction? My answer to this
question is no, for three reasons.
First, I doubt that the literature presents a random sample of events. Splashy
results get more attention, and this creates an incentive to Þnd them. That
dredging for anomalies is a rewarding occupation is suggested by the fact that
the anomalies literature shows so little sensitivity to the alternative hypothesis
problem. The same authors, viewing di¤erent events, are often content with
overreaction or underreaction, and are willing to infer that both warrant
rejecting market e¦ciency.
Second, some apparent anomalies may be generated by rational asset pricing.
Fama and French (1996) Þnd that the long-term return reversals of DeBondt
and Thaler (1985) and the contrarian returns of Lakonishok et al. (1994) are
captured by a multifactor asset pricing model. In a nutshell, return covariation
among long-term losers seems to be associated with a risk premium that can
explain why they have higher future average returns than long-term winners.
Fama and French (1996) discuss the quarrels with their multifactor model, but
E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306 287

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
their results su¦ce to illustrate an important point: Inferences about market
e¦ciency can be sensitive to the assumed model for expected returns.
Finally, but most important, a roughly even split between overreaction and
underreaction would not be much support for market e¦ciency if the long-term
return anomalies are so large they cannot possibly be attributed to chance.
Section 5 argues, however, that even viewed individually, most anomalies are
shaky. They tend to disappear when reasonable alternative approaches are used
to measure them.
3. Behavioral models of underreaction and overreaction
Before examining individual long-term return studies, I Þrst consider two
behavioral models, recently proposed by Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (BSV
1998) and Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subramanyam (DHS 1997), to explain how
the judgment biases of investors can produce overreaction to some events and
underreaction to others.
The BSV model is motivated by evidence from cognitive psychology of two
judgment biases. (i) The representativeness bias of Kahneman and Tversky
(1982): People give too much weight to recent patterns in the data and too little
to the properties of the population that generates the data. (ii) Conservatism,
attributed to Edwards (1968): The slow updating of models in the face of new
evidence.
In the model of stock prices proposed by BSV to capture the two judgment
biases, earnings are a random walk, but investors falsely perceive that there are
two earnings regimes. In regime A, which investors assume is more likely,
earnings are mean-reverting. When investors decide regime A holds, a stockÕs
price under-reacts to a change in earnings because investors mistakenly think
the change is likely to be temporary. When this expectation is not conÞrmed by
later earnings, stock prices show a delayed response to earlier earnings. In
regime B, which investors think is less likely, a run of earnings changes of the
same sign leads investors to perceive that a ÞrmÕs earnings are trending. Once
investors are convinced that the trending regime B holds, they incorrectly
extrapolate the trend and the stock price over-reacts. Because earnings are
a random walk, the overreaction is exposed by future earnings, leading to
reversal of long-term returns.
Regime A in the BSV model is motivated by the evidence of short-term
momentum in stock returns (Jegadeesh and Titman, 1993) and the evidence of
delayed short-term responses of stock prices to earnings announcements (Ball
and Brown, 1968; Bernard and Thomas, 1990). Regime B is meant to explain the
long-term return reversals of DeBondt and Thaler (1985) and the returns to the
contrarian investment strategies of Lakonishok et al. (1994). How does the
model do on other anomalies?
288 E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
The prediction of regime B is reversal of long-term abnormal returns. SpeciÞ-
cally, persistent long-term pre-event returns are evidence of market overreaction
which should eventually be corrected in post-event returns. In addition to
DeBondt and Thaler (1985) and Lakonishok et al. (1994), other events consistent
with this prediction are seasoned equity o¤erings (Loughran and Ritter, 1995;
Mitchell and Sta¤ord, 1997), new exchange listings (Dharan and Ikenberry,
1995), and returns to acquiring Þrms in mergers (Asquith, 1983). All these events
are characterized by positive long-term abnormal returns before the event and
negative abnormal returns thereafter.
But long-term return reversal is not the norm. Events characterized by
long-term post-event abnormal returns of the same sign as long-term pre-event
returns include dividend initiations and omissions (Michaely et al., 1995), stock
splits (Ikenberry et al., 1996; Desai and Jain, 1997), proxy contests (Ikenberry
and Lakonishok, 1993), and spino¤s (Miles and Rosenfeld, 1983; Cusatis et al.,
1993).
In short, and not surprisingly, the BSV model does well on the anomalies it
was designed to explain. But its prediction of long-term return reversal does not
capture the range of long-term results observed in the literature. On the whole,
the long-term return literature seems more consistent with the market e¦ciency
prediction that long-term return continuation and long-term return reversal are
equally likely chance results.
The DHS model has di¤erent behavioral foundations than the BSV model. In
DHS there are informed and uninformed investors. The uninformed are not
subject to judgment biases. But stock prices are determined by the informed
investors, and they are subject to two biases, overconÞdence and biased self-
attribution. OverconÞdence leads them to exaggerate the precision of their
private signals about a stockÕs value. Biased self-attribution causes them to
downweight public signals about value, especially when the public signals
contradict their private signals. Overreaction to private information and under-
reaction to public information tend to produce short-term continuation of stock
returns but long-term reversals as public information eventually overwhelms the
behavioral biases. Thus, though based on di¤erent behavioral premises, the
DHS predictions are close to those of BSV, and the DHS model shares the
empirical successes and failures of the BSV model. This last comment also
applies to Hong and Stein (1997).
DHS make a special prediction about what they call selective events. These
are events that occur to take advantage of the mispricing of a ÞrmÕs stock. For
example, managers announce a new stock issue when a ÞrmÕs stock price is too
high, or they repurchase shares when the stock price is too low. This public
signal produces an immediate price reaction that absorbs some of the mispric-
ing. But in the DHS model, the announcement period price response is incom-
plete because informed investors overweight their prior beliefs about the stockÕs
value. (The conservatism bias of the BSV model would produce a similar result.)
E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306 289

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
Table 1
Signs of long-term pre-event, announcement, and long-term post-event returns for various long-
term return studies
Event Long-term
pre-event
return
Announcement
return
Long-term
post-event
return
Initial public o¤erings (IPOs)
(Ibbotson, 1975; Loughran and Ritter, 1995)
Not
available
#!
Seasoned equity o¤erings
(Loughran and Ritter, 1995)
#! !
Mergers (acquiring Þrm)
(Asquith, 1983;
Agrawal et al., 1992)
# 0 !
Dividend initiations
(Michaely et al., 1995)
## #
Dividend omissions
(Michaely et al., 1995)
!! !
Earnings announcements
(Ball and Brown, 1968; Bernard
and Thomas, 1990)
Not
available
##
New exchange listings
(Dharan and Ikenberry, 1995)
## !
Share repurchases (open market)
(Ikenberry et al., 1995; Mitchell and
Sta¤ord, 1997)
0 ##
Share repurchases (tenders)
(Lakonishok and Vermaelen, 1990;
Mitchell and Sta¤ord, 1997)
0 ##
Proxy Þghts
(Ikenberry and Lakonishok, 1993)
!# ! (or 0)
Stock splits
(Dharan and Ikenberry, 1995; Ikenberry
et al., 1996)
## #
Spino¤s
(Miles and Rosenfeld, 1983; Cusatis
et al., 1993)
## # (or 0)
Eventually, the mispricing is fully absorbed as further public information con-
Þrms the information implied by the event announcement. The general predic-
tion for selective events is thus momentum; stock returns after an event an-
nouncement will tend to have the same sign as the announcement period return.
Does the DHS prediction about selective events stand up to the data? Table 1
summarizes the signs of short-term announcement returns and long-term
290 E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
post-announcement returns for the major long-term return studies. Except for
earnings announcements, all these events seem selective. As predicted by DHS,
announcement and post-announcement returns have the same sign for SEOs,
dividend initiations and omissions, share repurchases, stock splits, and spino¤s.
But announcement and post-announcement returns have opposite signs for new
exchange listings and proxy Þghts, and the negative post-event returns to
acquiring Þrms in mergers are not preceded by negative announcement returns.
Most embarrassing for the DHS prediction, the long-term negative post-event
returns of IPOs (the premier long-term return anomaly) are preceded by positive
returns for a few months following the event (Ibbotson, 1975; Ritter, 1991).
Finally, given the demonstrated ingenuity of the theory branch of Þnance, and
given the long litany of apparent judgment biases unearthed by cognitive
psychologists (DeBondt and Thaler, 1995), it is safe to predict that we will soon
see a menu of behavioral models that can be mixed and matched to explain
speciÞc anomalies. My view is that any new model should be judged (as above)
on how it explains the big picture. The question should be: Does the new model
produce rejectable predictions that capture the menu of anomalies better than
market e¦ciency? For existing behavioral models, my answer to this question
(perhaps predictably) is an emphatic no.
The main task that remains is to examine the long-term return anomalies one
at a time to see if they deliver on their claims. We set the stage with a discussion
of some of the general problems that arise in tests on long-term returns.
4. Drawing inferences from long-term returns
Fama (1970) emphasizes that market e¦ciency must be tested jointly with
a model for expected (normal) returns. The problem is that all models for
expected returns are incomplete descriptions of the systematic patterns in
average returns during any sample period. As a result, tests of e¦ciency are
always contaminated by a bad-model problem.
The bad-model problem is less serious in event studies that focus on short
return windows (a few days) since daily expected returns are close to zero and so
have little e¤ect on estimates of unexpected (abnormal) returns. But the problem
grows with the return horizon. A bad-model problem that produces a spurious
abnormal average return of x% per month eventually becomes statistically
reliable in cumulative monthly abnormal returns (CARs). The reason is that the
mean of the CAR increases like N, the number of months summed, but the
standard error of the CAR increases like N1@2. In AARs (averages of monthly
abnormal returns), the pricing error is constant atx%, but the standard error of
the AAR decreases like N~1@2. Bad-model problems are most acute with long-
term buy-and-hold abnormal returns (BHARs), which compound (multiply) an
expected-return modelÕs problems in explaining short-term returns.
E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306 291

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
This section discusses various approaches that attempt to limit bad-model
problems. It also discusses a related issue, the relevant return metric in tests on
long-term returns. I argue that theoretical and statistical considerations alike
suggest that CARs (or AARs) should be used, rather than BHARs.
4.1. Bad- model problems
Bad-model problems are of two types. First, any asset pricing model is just
a model and so does not completely describe expected returns. For example, the
CAPM of Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965) does not seem to describe expected
returns on small stocks (Banz, 1981). If an event sample is tilted toward small
stocks, risk adjustment with the CAPM can produce spurious abnormal returns.
Second, even if there were a true model, any sample period produces systematic
deviations from the modelÕs predictions, that is, sample-speciÞc patterns in
average returns that are due to chance. If an event sample is tilted toward
sample-speciÞc patterns in average returns, a spurious anomaly can arise even
with risk adjustment using the true asset pricing model.
One approach to limiting bad-model problems bypasses formal asset pricing
models by using Þrm-speciÞc models for expected returns. For example, the
stock split study of Fama et al. (1969) uses the market model to measure
abnormal returns. The intercept and slope from the regression of a stockÕs return
on the market return, estimated outside the event period, are used to estimate
the stockÕs expected returns conditional on market returns during the event
period. MasulisÕs (1980) comparison period approach uses a stockÕs average
return outside the event period as the estimate of its expected return during the
event period.
Unlike formal asset pricing models, the market model and the comparison
period approach produce Þrm-speciÞc expected return estimates; that is,
a stockÕs expected return is estimated without constraining the cross-section of
expected returns. Thus, these approaches can be used to study the reaction of
stock prices to Þrm-speciÞc events (splits, earnings, etc.). But they cannot
identify anomalies in the cross-section of average returns, like the size e¤ect of
Banz (1981), since such anomalies must be measured relative to predictions
about the cross-section of average returns.
The hypothesis in studies that focus on long-term returns is that the adjust-
ment of stock prices to an event may be spread over a long post-event period.
For many events, long periods of unusual pre-event returns are common.
Thus, the choice of a normal period to estimate a stockÕs expected return or
its market model parameters is problematic. Perhaps because of this
problem, event studies often control for expected returns with approaches that
constrain the cross-section of expected returns. An advantage of these
approaches is that they do not require out-of-sample parameter estimates.
A disadvantage is that constraints on the cross-section of expected returns
292 E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
always produce imperfect descriptions of average returns, and so can lead to
bad-model problems.
For example, one approach estimates an abnormal return as the di¤erence
between an event ÞrmÕs return and the return on a non-event Þrm or portfolio
that is similar on characteristics known to be related to average returns. The
hope in this matching approach is to control for cross-Þrm variation in average
returns due both to di¤erences in expected returns and to chance sample-speciÞc
patterns in average returns. For example, following BanzÕ (1981) evidence that
small stocks have higher average returns than predicted by the CAPM, an event
stockÕs abnormal return is often estimated as the di¤erence between its return
and the return on non-event stocks matched to the event stock on size. Follow-
ing the evidence of Fama and French (1992) that average stock returns are also
related to book-to-market equity ( BE/ME), it is now common to estimate
abnormal returns by matching event stocks with non-event stocks similar in
terms of size and BE/ME.
When we analyze individual event studies, we shall see that matching on size
can produce much di¤erent abnormal returns than matching on size and
BE/ME. And size and BE/ME surely do not capture all relevant cross-Þrm
variation in average returns due to expected returns or sample-speciÞc patterns
in average returns. In short, the matching approach is not a panacea for
bad-model problems in studies of long-term abnormal returns.
Another method of estimating abnormal returns is to use an asset pricing
model to estimate expected returns. Early studies of long-term abnormal returns
(Ja¤e, 1974; Mandelker, 1974; Asquith, 1983) use the CAPM. Some recent
studies use the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993). Like all asset
pricing models, however, the CAPM and the FamaÐFrench model are incom-
plete descriptions of average returns. The shortcomings of the CAPM are well
known (Fama and French, 1992). Fama and French (1993) show that their
three-factor model does not even provide a full explanation of average returns
on portfolios formed on size andBE/ME, the dimensions of average returns that
the modelÕs risk factors are designed to capture.
In short, bad-model problems are unavoidable, and they are more serious in
tests on long-term returns. When we review individual studies in Section 5, the
tracks of the bad-model problem will be clear. Di¤erent models for expected
returns produce di¤erent estimates of long-term abnormal returns. And a rea-
sonable change of models often causes an anomaly to disappear. I argue that
when this happens, the anomaly is not much evidence against market e¦ciency.
4.2. The return metric
Studies of long-term returns are also sensitive to the way the tests are done.
Average monthly abnormal returns (AARs or CARs) can produce di¤erent
inferences than buy-and-hold abnormal returns (BHARs). Equal-weight returns
E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306 293

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
produce di¤erent results than value-weight returns. And failure to account for
the cross-correlation of event Þrm returns during long post-event periods can
a¤ect inferences. These implementation issues are discussed next.
4.2.1. The return metric: theoretical issues
In principle, the model of market equilibrium jointly tested with market
e¦ciency speciÞes the unit of time for returns. For example, if the model deÞnes
equilibrium in terms of monthly expected returns, average monthly returns
should be the metric used to test market e¦ciency. To examine how prices
respond over periods longer than a month, one can average (AARs) or sum
(CARs) the average monthly abnormal returns. Beginning with Fama et al.
(1969), AARs and CARs are a common approach to examining long-term
returns.
A criticism of this approach is that an average monthly return does not
accurately measure the return to an investor who holds a security for a long
post-event period. Long-term investor experience is better captured by com-
pounding short-term returns to obtain long-term buy-and-hold returns. Much
of the recent literature tests buy-and-hold abnormal returns for periods up to
Þve years after an event.
Investor experience is interesting, and long-term BHARs are thus interesting.
But formal tests for abnormal returns should use the return metric called for by
the model invoked to estimate expected (normal) returns. The problem, of
course, is that discrete-time asset pricing models are silent on the relevant
interval for expected returns. Nevertheless, there are at least three theoretical
reasons to lean toward shorter intervals:
(i) Asset pricing models, like the Sharpe (1964)ÐLintner (1965) CAPM and the
discrete-time version of MertonÕs (1973) ICAPM, commonly assume nor-
mally distributed returns. Normality is a better approximation for short
horizons like a month than for longer horizons, where skewness becomes
increasingly important (Fama, 1976, 1996).
(ii) The empirical tests of asset pricing models, invoked to justify applying the
models in tests of market e¦ciency, typically use monthly returns. I know
of no tests of asset pricing models on Þve-year returns.
(iii) Mitchell and Sta¤ord (1997) point out that BHARs can give false impres-
sions of the speed of price adjustment to an event. The reason is that
BHARs can grow with the return horizon even when there is no abnormal
return after the Þrst period. For example, suppose returns for the Þrst year
after the event are 10% for event Þrms and zero for benchmark Þrms, so
the Þrst-year abnormal return is 10%. Suppose event and benchmark
Þrms both have a 100% buy-and-hold return over the next four years.
Although there is no abnormal return after the Þrst year, the BHAR after
Þve years grows to 20% [i.e., (1.1]2.0)!(1.0]2.0)].
294 E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
4.2.2. The return metric: statistical issues
AARs and CARs also pose fewer statistical problems than long-term BHARs.
Barber and Lyon (1997) provide the most complete discussion of the inference
problems in tests on long-term returns. [See also Kothari and Warner (1997).]
Barber and Lyon favor BHARs, but their tests show that inferences are less
problematic for average monthly returns (AARs or CARs). In a follow-up paper,
Lyon et al. (1997) develop elaborate techniques for correcting some of the
inference problems of BHARs. But they acknowledge that their improved
methods for BHARs produce inferences no more reliable than simpler methods
applied to monthly AARs or CARs. The reason is that average monthly returns
avoid the problems (e.g., extreme skewness) produced by compounding monthly
returns to get long-term BHARs.
Brav (1997) emphasizes that all existing methods for drawing inferences from
BHARs, including those in Lyon et al. (1997), fail to correct fully for the
correlation of returns across events not absorbed by the model used to adjust for
expected returns. The problem is more severe in long-term BHARs because
more Þrms have events within, say, a given Þve-year window than within
a three-day window. Brav (1997) presents an elaborate scheme to adjust for the
cross-correlation of long-term BHARs in special cases (e.g., when it is due to
industry e¤ects). But a full solution is not typically available because the number
of return covariances to be estimated is greater than the number of time-series
observations.
In contrast, if average monthly returns are used, there has long been a full
solution to the cross-correlation problem. Suppose the post-event period of
interest is Þve years. For each calendar month, calculate the abnormal return on
each stock that had an event in the last Þve years. (Abnormal returns can be
estimated in any reasonable way, for example, with a matching Þrm or matching
portfolio approach, or with an asset pricing model.) Then average the abnormal
returns for the calendar month across stocks to get the abnormal return for the
month on the portfolio of stocks with an event in the last Þve years. Re-form the
portfolio every month. The time-series variation of the monthly abnormal
return on this portfolio accurately captures the e¤ects of the correlation of
returns across event stocks missed by the model for expected returns. The mean
and variance of the time series of abnormal portfolio returns can be used to test
the average monthly response of the prices of event stocks for Þve years
following the event. The approach can also be reÞned to allow for heteroskedas-
ticity of the portfolioÕs abnormal return due to changes through time in the
composition of the portfolio. This rolling portfolio approach (with reÞnements)
was Þrst used by Ja¤e (1974) and Mandelker (1974).
A referee suggests that the portfolio approach described above can cause an
anomaly to be understated if events bunch in time because Þrms exploit pricing
errors during windows of opportunity. For example, Loughran and Ritter (1995)
suggest that IPOs bunch because particular industries tend to be overvalued at
E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306 295

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
speciÞc times. This criticism of the portfolio approach is valid if monthly
abnormal portfolio returns are weighted equally in calculating an overall aver-
age monthly abnormal return. One solution to the problem is to adjust for
heteroskedasticity. SpeciÞcally, following Ja¤e (1974) and Mandelker (1974),
divide the abnormal portfolio return for each month by an estimate of its
standard deviation. The overall abnormal return is then estimated by averag-
ing the standardized monthly abnormal returns. This approach is attractive
because it weights each monthÕs abnormal return by its statistical precision,
which seems like the right way to capture the increased information due to
event bunching. More generally, however, one can weight the portfolio
abnormal return for a month in any way that captures the economic hypothesis
of interest.
4.2.3. The return metric: value weights versus equal weights
In the review of individual studies that follows, we Þnd that apparent
anomalies in long-term post-event returns typically shrink a lot and often
disappear when event Þrms are value-weighted rather than equal-weighted. One
can argue that value-weight returns give the right perspective on an anomaly
because they more accurately capture the total wealth e¤ects experienced by
investors. But I am more concerned about bad-model problems. All the com-
mon asset pricing models, including the Fama ÐFrench (1993) three-factor
model, have systematic problems explaining the average returns on categories of
small stocks. Since equal-weight portfolio returns give more weight to small
stocks, bad-model problems are more severe in inferences from equal-weight
returns.
Many readers suggest that more serious mispricing of small stocks is a
general prediction of behavioral Þnance. It is thus worth noting that the
two behavioral pricing models reviewed in Section 3 do not produce this
prediction. In Barberis et al. (1998), pricing is dominated by a representative
investor, and there is no prediction that the judgment biases of this investor are
more severe for small stocks. In Daniel et al. (1997), pricing is dominated by
informed investors subject to judgment biases. Uninformed investors have no
such biases. Thus, if large stocks attract more interest from informed investors
(e.g., security analysts), mispricing problems might be more severe for large
stocks.
Most important, the cognitive psychology literature does not seem to say that
di¤erent classes of people are more subject to judgment biases. The same biases
that plague college students (the subjects of most cognitive psychology experi-
ments) also occur among experts (see the references in Barberis et al.). Thus,
cognitive psychology, the basis of behavioral Þnance, does not seem to provide
a basis for the common presumption that small stocks are more likely to be
mispriced.
296 E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306

=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
5. The reliability of individual studies
The summary of long-term return studies in Sections 2 and 3 accepts the
conclusions of the papers at face value. Now the gloves come o¤. Examining
long-term return anomalies one at a time, I argue that most are fragile. Abnor-
mal returns often disappear with reasonable changes in the way they are
measured.
5.1. IPOs and SEOs
Among the more striking of the long-term return anomalies is the study of
initial public o¤erings (IPOs) and seasoned equity o¤erings (SEOs) by Loughran
and Ritter (1995). They Þnd that the total wealth generated at the end of Þve
years if one invests $1 in each IPO or SEO immediately following the event is
about 70% of that produced by the same buy-and-hold strategy applied to
a sample of stocks matched to the IPOs and SEOs on size.
IPOs and SEOs clearly have poor long-term returns during the Lough-
ranÐRitter sample period (1970Ð1990). The interesting question is whether the
returns are really abnormal or whether they are shared with non-event Þrms
similar on characteristics related to average returns. During the Lough-
ranÐRitter period, variables known to be related to average stock return include
size and book-to-market equity (Fama and French, 1992), and short-term past
return (Jegadeesh and Titman, 1993). Since the long-term buy-and-hold returns
in Loughran and Ritter only control for size, their results might be a¤ected by
other variables that are systematically related to average return.
Following up on this possibility, Brav and Gompers (1997) compare Þve-year
buy-and-hold returns on IPOs with the returns on portfolios that match the
IPOs on size and book-to-market equity (BE/ME) but exclude SEOs as well as
IPOs. The Þve-year wealth relative (the ratio of Þve-year buy-and-hold wealth
for IPOs to Þve-year buy-and-hold wealth for the benchmarks) rises from about
0.7 with the LoughranÐRitter size benchmarks to a bit more than 1.0 (that is, the
anomaly disappears) when the benchmarks control forBE/ME as well as size.
Similarly, Brav et al. (1995) Þnd that the Þve-year buy-and-hold returns on
SEOs are close to those of non-event portfolios matched on size andBE/ME.
Brav (1997) and Mitchell and Sta¤ord (1997) show that IPOs and SEOs are
typically small growth stocks. Fama and French (1993) show that such stocks
have low returns during the post-1963 period. The results of Brav and Gompers
(1997) and Brav et al. (1995) then suggest that explaining the IPO-SEO anomaly
reduces to explaining why small growth stocks in general have poor returns
during the IPO-SEO sample period. In other words, if there is a mispricing
problem, it is not special to IPO-SEO stocks.
Brav and Gompers (1997) and Brav et al. (1995) also Þnd that when IPOs and
SEOs are value-weighted, Þve-year abnormal buy-and-hold returns shrink a lot,
E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306 297

=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
whatever the benchmark. For IPOs, value-weight Þve-year wealth relatives are
0.86 or greater for all benchmarks, and four of six benchmarks produce wealth
relatives in excess of 0.9. For SEOs, value-weight Þve-year wealth relatives are
0.88 or greater for all benchmarks; three of six are in excess of 0.98. The message
is that many IPO and SEO stocks are tiny, and they are inßuential in the returns
observed when sample Þrms are equal-weighted. This result is general. We shall
see that apparent anomalies typically shrink a lot when viewed in terms of
value-weight returns.
Loughran and Ritter (1995), Brav and Gompers (1997), and Brav et al. (1995)
do not engage in the treacherous game of drawing statistical inferences from
long-term buy-and-hold returns. Their inferences are based on average monthly
returns. Every month they calculate the return on a portfolio that contains all
Þrms with an IPO or SEO in the last Þve years. The three-factor model of Fama
and French (FF 1993) is then used to estimate the portfolioÕs abnormal returns.
The average monthly abnormal return during the Þve-year post-event period is
the intercept, a1, of the time-series regression
R1t!R&t"aP#b1[RMt!R&t]#s1SMB#h1HML#e1t, (1)
where R1t is the monthly return on the IPO or SEO portfolio, R&t is the
one-month Treasury bill rate, RMt is the monthly return on a value-weight
market portfolio of NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq stocks, SMB is the di¤erence
between the returns on portfolios of small and big stocks (below or above the
NYSE median), and HML is the di¤erence between the returns on portfolios of
high- and low- BE/ME stocks (above and below the 0.7 and 0.3 fractiles of
BE/ME).
Brav et al. (1995) estimate the intercepts in (1) for equal- and value-weight
portfolios of the SEOs of their 1975 Ð92 sample period. The intercept for the
equal-weight portfolio is!0.42% per month (t"!4.8), but the intercept for
the value-weight portfolio is!0.14% per month (t"!1.18). Similarly, Brav
and Gompers (1997) Þnd that the intercepts for equal- and value-weight port-
folios of IPOs that are not backed by venture capitalists are !0.52%
(t"!2.80) and !0.29% (t"!1.84). For IPOs backed by venture capital-
ists, the intercepts are slightly positive. Loughran and Ritter (1995) only show
regressions that combine IPOs and SEOs, but their results are similar: Equal-
weight portfolios produce reliably negative intercepts, but abnormal returns for
value-weight portfolios are economically and statistically close to zero.
Since inferences about abnormal returns from estimates of (1) on rolling
post-event portfolio returns are common in the recent anomalies literature, it is
important to note three potential problems.
First, since the Þrms in the event portfolio change through time, the true
slopes on the risk factors in (1) are time-varying. Mitchell and Sta¤ord (1997)
conÞrm that for three important events (mergers, share repurchases, and SEOs),
changes in the composition of the event portfolio generate substantial variation
298 E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306

=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
in the slopes in (1). For SEOs, they Þnd that the intercepts for their 1960 Ð93
period for equal- and value-weight portfolios drop from!0.38 (t"4.47) and
!0.14 (t"!1.51) in the constant slope regressions, to !0.24 (t"!3.64)
and!0.07 (t"!0.81) in the regressions that allow the slopes to vary through
time.
Second, the number of Þrms in the event portfolio changes through time,
creating residual heteroskedasticity that can a¤ect inferences about the inter-
cept. [Solutions to this problem like those in Ja¤e (1974) and Mandelker (1974)
are apparently a lost technology.]
Third, but most important, Fama and French (1993) show that the three-
factor model is not a perfect story for average returns. This bad-model problem
can produce spurious anomalies in event studies. For example, IPOs and SEOs
tend to be small, low- BE/ME Þrms. Fama and French (1993) show that the
three-factor model overestimates average returns on such Þrms during the
IPO-SEO sample periods. This bad-model problem can explain why estimates
of (1) on equal-weight IPO and SEO portfolios produce reliably negative
intercepts, but estimates on value-weight portfolios produce intercepts close to
zero. It can also explain why the intercepts in (1), which control for loadings on
risk factors related to size andBE/ME, suggest abnormal post-event returns for
equal-weight IPO and SEO portfolios. But with direct benchmark matching on
size and BE/ME, the abnormal returns largely disappear.
I emphasize, however, that the results for IPOs and SEOs do not imply that
benchmark matching on size and BE/ME is always superior to estimating
abnormal returns as the intercepts from (1). All methods for estimating abnor-
mal returns are subject to bad-model problems, and no method is likely to
minimize bad-model problems for all classes of events. The important general
message from the IPO-SEO results is one of caution: Two approaches that seem
closely related (both attempt to control for variation in average returns related
to size and BE/ME) can produce much di¤erent estimates of long-term abnor-
mal returns.
In sum, I read Brav and Gompers (1997) and Brav et al. (1995) as showing that
the poor long-term buy-and-hold returns following IPOs and SEOs are not
a special anomaly. The low returns are shared with other Þrms similar on two
dimensions, size andBE/ME, known to be related to average return. Moreover,
when IPOs and SEOs are value-weighted, abnormal returns shrink for all
benchmarks, and they are not reliably di¤erent from zero. Thus, if there is an
IPO-SEO anomaly, it seems to be largely restricted to tiny Þrms.
5.2. Mergers
Asquith (1983) and Agrawal et al. (1992) Þnd negative abnormal returns for
acquiring Þrms for up to Þve years following merger announcements. Using
a comprehensive sample of mergers for 1960Ð93, Mitchell and Sta¤ord (1997)
E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306 299

=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
also Þnd negative long-term abnormal returns for acquiring Þrms. Since these
studies produce similar results, I focus on Mitchell and Sta¤ord (MS 1997).
MS Þnd that the three-year post-event buy-and-hold return for equal-
weighted acquiring Þrms is on average 4% lower than for portfolios matched to
acquiring Þrms on size and BE/ME. In economic terms, this is not a dramatic
anomaly. For formal inferences, MS estimate the three-factor model (1) on the
monthly returns on a rolling portfolio that includes Þrms with acquisitions
during the preceding three years. When the acquirers are equal-weighted, the
intercept in Eq. (1), that is, the average monthly abnormal return for the three
years after a merger, is !0.25% per month (!25 basis points, t"!3.49),
which is larger than but roughly consistent with the BH returns. When acquiring
Þrms are value-weighted, the intercept in Eq. (1) drops to!0.11% per month
(t"!1.55). Thus, if there is an anomaly, it is more important for smaller
acquiring Þrms. Finally, MS and Loughran and Vijh (1997) show that abnormal
post-announcement average returns to acquiring Þrms are limited to mergers
Þnanced with stock, that is, mergers that are also SEOs. When mergers are
Þnanced without issuing stock, the negative abnormal post-event returns disap-
pear. This suggests that there is no distinct merger anomaly. Any merger
anomaly may be the SEO anomaly in disguise.
5.3. Stock splits
Desai and Jain (1997) and Ikenberry et al. (1996) Þnd that for the 17-year
1975Ð91 period, stock splits are followed by positive abnormal returns of about
7% in the year after the split. Abnormal returns are calculated relative to
benchmarks that control for size,BE/ME, and, in Desai and Jain, past one-year
return.
One way to test whether such an anomaly is real or the sample-speciÞc result
of chance is to examine a di¤erent sample period. Fama et al. (1969) examine
splits during the 33-year 1927 Ð59 period. They Þnd no drift in cumulative
abnormal returns during the 30 months following splits. Since the split anomaly
fails the out-of-sample test provided by FFJR, it seems reasonable to conclude
that the 1975Ð91 anomaly is not real, unless the market has recently become
ine¦cient.
Desai and Jain (1997) and Ikenberry et al. (1996) do provide neat evidence on
one of the pitfalls in using buy-and-hold abnormal returns to judge the long-
term return drift associated with an event. As noted earlier, Mitchell and
Sta¤ord (1997) point out that BHARs are likely to grow with the return horizon
even when there is no abnormal return after the Þrst period. For the 1975Ð91
period, the abnormal return is about 7% for the Þrst year following stock splits,
but it is close to zero in the following two years (slightly negative in the second
and slightly positive in the third). BHARs, however, rise from 7% to about 12%
after three years.
300 E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306

=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
One way to avoid the distorted perspective on long-term drift produced by
BHARs is to examine ratios rather than di¤erences of the cumulative wealths
generated by event and benchmark Þrms, as in Ritter (1991) and Loughran and
Ritter (1995). Another is the time-worn CAR approach of FFJR, which sums
returns rather than compounding them, or the rolling portfolio average monthly
abnormal return (AAR) approach of Ja¤e (1974) and Mandelker (1974).
5.4. Self- tenders and share repurchases
Lakonishok and Vermaelen (1990) examine long-term returns following self-
tender o¤ers (tenders by Þrms for their own shares) during the 1962Ð86 period.
Ikenberry et al. (1995) examine long-term returns following share repurchases
during the 1980Ð90 period. Mitchell and Sta¤ord (1997) study both self-tenders
and repurchases for the 1960Ð93 period. Since the MS results are similar to but
more comprehensive than those in the earlier papers, the discussion focuses on
them.
MS Þnd that three-year post-event BHARs, computed relative to matching
portfolios that control for size andBE/ME, are 9% for self-tenders (475 events)
and 19% for the much larger sample of 2,542 repurchases. When they estimate
the three-factor regression (1) for the monthly returns on an equal-weight
portfolio that contains all self-tenders and repurchases in the last three years,
however, the average abnormal monthly return is puny, 0.11% per month
(t"1.62). Any hint of signiÞcance, economic or statistical, disappears entirely
when the stocks in the rolling portfolio are value-weighted. The intercept for the
value-weight portfolio of self-tenders and repurchases is !0.03% (!3 basis
points per month, t"!0.34). In short, viewed from the perspective of the
three-factor model of Eq. (1), there is no share repurchase anomaly.
Note, once again, that two apparently similar methods for estimating abnor-
mal returns, (i) a matching portfolio control for size and BE/ME and (ii) an
asset pricing regression that adjusts for sensitivity to risk factors related to size
and BE/ME, produce somewhat di¤erent results. This again illustrates that
estimates of long-term abnormal returns can be sensitive to apparently small
changes in technique.
5.5. Exchange listings
Dharan and Ikenberry (1995) Þnd that during the 1962Ð90 period, stocks that
newly list on the NYSE, or move from Nasdaq to Amex, have negative post-
listing abnormal returns. When returns are risk-adjusted using matching port-
folios formed on size and BE/ME, the three-year average abnormal return is
!7.02%. The t-statistic for this CAR is !2.78, but this is without a full
adjustment for the correlation of abnormal returns across Þrms. Moreover,
Dharan and Ikenberry show that the negative post-listing abnormal returns are
E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306 301

=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
limited to Þrms below the NYSE-Amex median in size. Thus, once again, an
apparent anomaly is limited to small stocks.
Mitchell and Sta¤ord (1997) o¤er concrete perspective on how signiÞcance
levels can be overstated because of the failure to adjust for the correlation across
Þrms of post-event abnormal returns. Using the three-factor model (1), they
calculate the standard deviations of abnormal returns for portfolios of Þrms
with an event during the most recent 36 months. The proportions vary some-
what through time and across their three event classes (mergers, share repur-
chases, and SEOs), but on average the covariances of event-Þrm abnormal
returns account for about half the standard deviation of the event portfolioÕs
abnormal return. Thus, if the covariances are ignored, the standard error of the
abnormal portfolio return is too small by about 50%! This estimate need not
apply intact to the exchange listings of Dharan and Ikenberry (1995), but it
suggests that a full adjustment for the cross-correlation of post-listing abnormal
returns could cause the statistical reliability ( t"!2.78) of their !7.02%
post-event three-year CAR to disappear.
Dharan and IkenberryÕs explanation of their negative post-listing abnormal
returns is that Þrms are opportunistic, and they list their stocks to take advant-
age of the marketÕs overreaction to their recent good times. This explanation
seems shaky, however, given that any overreaction to past performance has
already occurred and will soon be reversed. Moreover, standard signaling
theory (e.g., Ross, 1977) does not predict that Þrms will incur costs to make
a false signal whose price e¤ects are soon obliterated. On the contrary, since
listing involves costs, it should be a signal that the Þrm is under-valued.
5.6. Di vidend initiations and omissions
Michaely et al. (1995) Þnd that during the 1964Ð88 period, Þrms that initiate
dividends have positive abnormal stock returns for three years after the event,
and Þrms omitting dividends have negative abnormal returns. For the same
sample, Brav (1997) Þnds that the three-year post-event abnormal return follow-
ing initiations disappears with benchmarks that control for size and BE/ME.
Michaely et al. (1995) show that the negative three-year abnormal returns
following omissions, conÞrmed by Brav (1997), are largely concentrated in the
second half of their 1964 Ð88 sample period. All this suggests that inferences
about long-term returns following changes in dividends should probably await
an out-of-sample test.
The Þnding that stock prices under-react to dividend announcements is
suspect on other grounds. It seems reasonable that underreaction would occur
because the market underestimates the information in dividends about future
earnings. However, from Watts (1973) to Benartzi et al. (1997), there is little
evidence that changes in dividends predict changes in earnings.
302 E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306

=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
5.7. Spino ¤s
Cusatis et al. (1993) study the post-event returns of spino¤s and their parents
for the 1965Ð88 period. The benchmarks are Þrms matched to the event Þrms on
size and industry, and abnormal returns are BHARs. Both parents and spino¤s
have positive abnormal returns in the three years after the event. The abnormal
returns are, however, limited to event Þrms (parents and spino¤s) acquired in
mergers. The conclusion is that the market does not properly assess the in-
creased probability of takeover (and the attendant buyout premiums) following
spino¤s.
The t-statistics for the three-year BHARs for spino¤s range from 0.58 to 2.55,
hardly overwhelming. Moreover, in calculating the t-statistics, the BHARs of
the event Þrms are assumed to be independent. It would not take a large
adjustment for cross-correlation to produce t-statistics that suggest no real
anomaly.
5.8. Proxy contests
Ikenberry and Lakonishok (1993) examine stock returns following proxy
contests during the 1968 Ð87 period. They Þnd negative post-event abnormal
returns relative to benchmarks that control for marketb and size. In the results
for all proxy contests, the post-event abnormal returns are not statistically
reliable. The negative post-event returns are only statistically reliable for the
50-odd proxy contests in which the dissidents win board representation. Since
this result is not an ex ante prediction, the weak evidence for the overall sample
seems more relevant, and it does not suggest a reliable anomaly. This is more or
less the conclusion of the authors.
5.9. Summary
If a reasonable change in the method of estimating abnormal returns causes
an anomaly to disappear, the anomaly is on shaky footing, and it is reasonable
to suggest that it is an illusion. Included in this category are IPOs, SEOs,
self-tenders, share repurchases, and dividend initiations. Moreover, the doubts
about these anomalies are the result of replication and robustness checks that
followed publication of the original studies. Other anomalies will likely fall prey
to the same process.
Other long-term return anomalies are economically or statistically marginal.
The negative post-event abnormal returns to acquiring Þrms in mergers are
economically small. For exchange listings, spino¤s, and proxy contests, a full
correction for the cross-correlation of long-term post-event abnormal returns
could easily reduce them to former anomalies.
E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306 303

=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
Some anomalies do not stand up to out-of-sample replication. Foremost (in
my mind) is the stock split anomaly observed after 1975, which is contradicted
by the earlier FFJR study. The long-term negative post-event returns of divi-
dend-omitting Þrms also seem sensitive to sample period.
Whenever value-weight returns are examined, apparent anomalies shrink
a lot and typically become statistically unreliable. At a minimum, this suggests
that anomalies are largely limited to small stocks. But a reasonable alternative
explanation is that small stocks are just a sure source of bad-model problems.
Small stocks always pose problems in tests of asset pricing models, so they are
prime candidates for bad-model problems in tests of market e¦ciency on
long-term returns.
Which anomalies are above suspicion? The post-earnings-announcement drift
Þrst reported by Ball and Brown (1968) has survived robustness checks, includ-
ing extension to more recent data (Bernard and Thomas, 1990; Chan et al.,
1996). Again, though, the anomaly is stronger for small stocks. The short-term
continuation of returns documented by Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) is also an
open puzzle, but it is still rather new and further tests are in order.
6. Conclusions
The recent Þnance literature seems to produce many long-term return
anomalies. Subjected to scrutiny, however, the evidence does not suggest that
market e¦ciency should be abandoned. Consistent with the market e¦ciency
hypothesis that the anomalies are chance results, apparent overreaction of stock
prices to information is about as common as underreaction. And post-event
continuation of pre-event abnormal returns is about as frequent as post-event
reversal. Most important, the long-term return anomalies are fragile. They tend
to disappear with reasonable changes in the way they are measured.
References
Agrawal, A., Ja¤e, Mandelker, G., 1992. The post-merger performance of acquiring Þrms: a re-
examination of an anomaly. Journal of Finance 47, 1605Ð1621.
Asquith, P., 1983. Merger bids, uncertainty and stockholder returns. Journal of Financial Econ-
omics 11, 51Ð83.
Ball, R., Brown, P., 1968. An empirical evaluation of accounting income numbers. Journal of
Accounting Research 6, 159Ð178.
Banz, R., 1981. The relationship between return and market value of common stocks. Journal of
Financial Economics 9, 3Ð18.
Barber, B., Lyon, J., 1997. Detecting long-horizon abnormal stock returns: the empirical power and
speciÞcation of test statistics. Journal of Financial Economics 43, 341.
Barberis, N., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1998. A model of investor sentiment. Journal of Financial
Economics 49, 307Ð343 (this issue).
304 E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306

=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
Benartzi, S., Michaely, R., Thaler, R., 1997. Do dividend changes signal the future or the past.
Journal of Finance 52, 1007Ð1034.
Bernard, V., Thomas, J., 1990. Evidence that stock prices do not fully reßect the implications of
current earnings for future earnings. Journal of Accounting and Economics 13, 305.
Brav, A., 1997. Inference in long-horizon event studies: a re-evaluation of the evidence. Unpublished
working paper. Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago.
Brav, A., Gompers, P., 1997. Myth or reality? The long-run underperformance of initial public
o¤erings: evidence from venture and nonventure capital-backed companies. Journal of Finance
52, 1791Ð1821.
Brav, A., Geczy, C., Gompers, P., 1995. The long-run underperformance of seasoned equity o¤erings
revisited. Unpublished working paper. Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago.
Chan, L., Jegadeesh, N., Lakonishok, J., 1996. Momentum strategies. Journal of Finance 51,
1681Ð1713.
Cusatis, P., Miles, J., Woolridge, J., 1993. Restructuring through spino¤s. Journal of Financial
Economics 33, 293Ð311.
Daniel, K., Hirshleifer, D., Subrahmanyam, A., 1997. A theory of overconÞdence, self-attribution,
and security market under- and over-reactions. Unpublished working paper. University of
Michigan.
DeBondt, W., Thaler, R., 1985. Does the stock market overreact? Journal of Finance 40, 793Ð805.
DeBondt, W., Thaler, R., 1995. Financial decision-making in markets and Þrms: a behavioral
perspective. In: Jarrow, R. et al. (Eds.), Handbooks in OR and MS, vol. 9, Elsevier, Amsterdam,
pp. 385Ð410.
Desai, H., Jain, P., 1997. Long-run common stock returns following splits and reverse splits. Journal
of Business 70, 409Ð433.
Dharan, B., Ikenberry, D., 1995. The long-run negative drift of post-listing stock returns. Journal of
Finance 50, 1547Ð1574.
Edwards, W., 1968. Conservatism in human information processing. In: Kleinmutz, B. (Ed.), Formal
Representation of Human Judgement. Wiley, New York.
Fama, E., 1970. E¦cient capital markets: a review of theory and empirical work. Journal of Finance
25, 383Ð417.
Fama, E., 1976. Foundations of Finance. Basic Books, New York.
Fama, E., 1996. Discounting under uncertainty. Journal of Business 69, 415Ð428.
Fama, E., Fisher, L., Jensen, M., Roll, R., 1969. The adjustment of stock prices to new information.
International Economic Review 10, 1Ð21.
Fama, E., French, K., 1992. The cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal of Finance 47,
427Ð465.
Fama, E., French, K., 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. Journal of
Financial Economics 33, 3Ð56.
Fama, E., French, K., 1996. Multifactor explanations of asset pricing anomalies. Journal of Finance
51, 55Ð84.
Hong, H., Stein, J., 1997. A uniÞed theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and overreaction in
asset markets. Unpublished working paper. Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.
Ibbotson, R., 1975. Price performance of common stock new issues. Journal of Financial Economics
2, 235Ð272.
Ikenberry, D., Lakonishok, J., 1993. Corporate governance through the proxy contest: evidence and
implications. Journal of Business 66, 405Ð435.
Ikenberry, D., Lakonishok, J., Vermaelen, T., 1995. Market underreaction to open market share
repurchases. Journal of Financial Economics 39, 181Ð208.
Ikenberry, D., Rankine, G., Stice, E., 1996. What do stock splits really signal? Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis 31, 357Ð377.
E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306 305

=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
Ja¤e, J., 1974. Special information and insider trading. Journal of Business 47, 410Ð428.
Jegadeesh, N., Titman, S., 1993. Returns to buying winners and selling losers: implications for stock
market e¦ciency. Journal of Finance 48, 65Ð91.
Kahneman, D., Tversky, A., 1982. Intuitive predictions: biases and corrective procedures. Reprinted
in Kahneman, Slovic, and Tversky, Judgement under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England.
Kothari, S., Warner, J., 1997. Measuring long-horizon security price performance. Journal of
Financial Economics 43, 301Ð339.
Lakonishok, J., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1994. Contrarian investment, extrapolation, and risk.
Journal of Finance 49, 1541Ð1578.
Lakonishok, J., Vermaelen, T., 1990. Anomalous price behavior around repurchase tender o¤ers.
Journal of Finance 45, 455Ð477.
Lintner, J., 1965. The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in stock
portfolios and capital budgets. Review of Economics and Statistics 47, 13Ð37.
Loughran, T., Ritter, J., 1995. The new issues puzzle. Journal of Finance 50, 23Ð51.
Loughran, T., Vijh, A., 1997. Do long-term shareholders beneÞt from corporate acquisitions?
Journal of Finance 52, 1765Ð1790.
Lyon, J., Barber, B., Tsai, C., 1997. Improved methods for tests of long-run abnormal returns.
Unpublished working paper. Graduate School of Management, University of California, Davis.
Mandelker, G., 1974. Risk and return: the case of merging Þrms. Journal of Financial Economics 1,
303.
Masulis, R., 1980. The e¤ects of capital structure changes on security prices: a study of exchange
o¤ers. Journal of Financial Economics 8, 139Ð177.
Merton, R., 1973. An intertemporal capital asset pricing model. Econometrica 41, 867Ð887.
Michaely, R., Thaler, R., Womack, K., 1995. Price reactions to dividend initiations and omissions.
Journal of Finance 50, 573Ð608.
Miles, J., Rosenfeld, J., 1983. The e¤ect of voluntary spino¤ announcements on shareholder wealth.
Journal of Finance 38, 1597Ð1606.
Mitchell, M., Sta¤ord, E., 1997. Managerial decisions and long-term stock price performance.
Unpublished working paper. Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago.
Ritter, J., 1991. The long-term performance of initial public o¤erings. Journal of Finance 46, 3Ð27.
Roll, R., 1986. The hubris hypothesis of corporate takeovers. Journal of Business 59, 197Ð216.
Ross, S., 1977. The determinants of Þnancial structure: the incentive signaling approach. Bell Journal
of Economics 8, 23Ð40.
Sharpe, W., 1964. Capital asset prices: a theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk.
Journal of Finance 19, 425.
Spiess, D., A§eck-Graves, J., 1995. Underperformance in long-run stock returns following seasoned
equity o¤erings. Journal of Financial Economics 38, 243Ð267.
Watts, R., 1973. The information content of dividends. Journal of Business 46, 191Ð211.
306 E.F. Fama /Journal of Financial Economics 49 (1998) 283 Ð306